Okay, now let's apply all this analysis to
improving the performance of our circuits.
The latency of a combinational logic circuit
is simply its propagation delay t_PD.
And the throughput is just 1/t_PD since we
start processing the next input only after
finishing the computation on the current input.
Consider a combinational system with three
components: F, G, and H, where F and G work
in parallel to produce the inputs to H.
Using this timing diagram we can follow the
processing of a particular input value X.
Sometime after X is valid and stable, the
F and G modules produce their outputs F(X)
and G(X).
Now that the inputs to H are valid and stable,
the H module will produce the system output
P(X) after a delay set by the propagation
delay of H.
The total elapsed time from valid input to
valid output is determined by the propagation
delays of the component modules.
Assuming we use those modules as-is, we can't
make any improvements on this latency.
But what about the system's throughput?
Observe that after producing their outputs,
the F and G modules are sitting sitting idle,
just holding their outputs stable while H
performs its computation.
Can we figure out a way for F and G to get
started processing the next input while still
letting H do its job on the first input?
In other words, can we divide the processing
of the combinational circuit into two stages
where the first stage computes F(X) and G(X),
and the second stage computes H(X)?
If we can, then we can increase the throughput
of the system.
Mr. Blue's inspiration is to use registers
to hold the values F(X) and G(X) for use by
H, while the F and G modules start working
on the next input value.
To make our timing analysis a little easier,
we'll assume that our pipelining registers
have a zero propagation delay and setup time.
The appropriate clock period for this sequential
circuit is determined by the propagation delay
of the slowest processing stage.
In this example, the stage with F and G needs
a clock period of at least 20 ns to work correctly.
And the stage with H needs a clock period
of 25 ns to work correctly.
So the second stage is the slowest and sets
the system clock period at 25 ns.
This will be our general plan for increasing
the throughput of combinational logic:
we'll use registers to divide the processing
into a sequence of stages, where the registers
capture the outputs from one processing stage
and hold them as inputs for the next processing
stage.
A particular input will progress through the
system at the rate of one stage per clock
cycle.
In this example, there are two stages in the
processing pipeline and the clock period is
25 ns, so the latency of the pipelined system
is 50 ns, i.e., the number of stages times
the system's clock period.
The latency of the pipeline system is a little
longer than the latency of the unpipelined
system.
However, the pipeline system produces 1 output
every clock period, or 25 ns.
The pipeline system has considerably better
throughput at the cost of a small increase
in latency.
Pipeline diagrams help us visualize the operation
of a pipelined system.
The rows of the pipeline diagram represent
the pipeline stages and the columns are successive
clock cycles.
At the beginning of clock cycle i the input
X_i becomes stable and valid.
Then during clock cycle i the F and G modules
process that input and at the end of the cycle
the results F(X_i) and G(X_i) are captured
by the pipeline registers between the first
and second stages.
Then in cycle i+1, H uses the captured values
do its share of the processing of X_i.
And, meanwhile, the F and G modules are working
on X_i+1.
You can see that the processing for a particular
input value moves diagonally through the diagram,
one pipeline stage per clock cycle.
At the end of cycle i+1, the output of H is
captured by the final pipeline register and
is available for use during cycle i+2.
The total time elapsed between the arrival
of an input and the availability of the output
is two cycles.
The processing continues cycle after cycle,
producing a new output every clock cycle.
Using the pipeline diagram we can track how
a particular input progresses through the
system or see what all the stages are doing
in any particular cycle.
We'll define a K-stage pipeline (or K-pipeline
for short) as an acyclic circuit having exactly
K registers on every path from input to output.
An unpipelined combinational circuit is thus
a 0-stage pipeline.
To make it easy to build larger pipelined
systems out of pipelined components, we'll
adopt the convention that every pipeline stage,
and hence every K-stage pipeline, has a register
on its output.
We'll use the techniques we learned for analyzing
the timing of sequential circuits to ensure
the clock signal common to all the pipeline
registers has a period sufficient to ensure
correct operation of each stage.
So for every register-to-register and input-to-register
path, we need to compute the sum of the propagation
delay of the input register, plus the propagation
delay of the combinational logic, plus the
setup time of the output register.
Then we'll choose the system's clock period
to be greater than or equal to the largest
such sum.
With the correct clock period and exactly
K-registers along each path from system input
to system output, we are guaranteed that the
K-pipeline will compute the same outputs as
the original unpipelined combinational circuit.
The latency of a K-pipeline is K times the
period of the system's clock.
And the throughput of a K-pipeline is the
frequency of the system's clock, i.e., 1 over
the clock period.